.TH KITTEN 1 "July 2026" "kitten 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
kitten \- print filesystem trees with metadata and text previews
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B kitten
.RI [ OPTION ]...
.RI [ PATH ]...
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B kitten
prints each requested path as a tree.
Regular files include their size and, by default, a terminal-safe inline
preview.
Directories, symbolic links, and special files are identified explicitly.
.PP
With no
.IR PATH ,
the current directory is inspected.
When exactly one directory is supplied,
.B kitten
enters it and displays the root as
.BR ./ .
Multiple paths are printed as separate roots.
Options may appear before or after path operands.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-m " " \fIBYTES\fR ", " \-\-max\-bytes= \fIBYTES\fR
Set the maximum preview size for one regular file.
The default is 256K.
.I BYTES
is an unsigned decimal number with an optional case-insensitive K, M, or G
suffix; suffixes use powers of 1024.
.TP
.BR \-L " " \fIDEPTH\fR ", " \-\-depth= \fIDEPTH\fR
Limit directory descent to the non-negative
.IR DEPTH .
Depth zero prints only the root.
Depth one includes immediate children without entering them.
.TP
.BR \-\-exclude= \fIPATTERN\fR
Skip directory entries matching the POSIX
.BR fnmatch (3)
pattern.
The option may be repeated.
Patterns are checked against the entry name, traversal path, and a traversal
path with a leading
.B ./
removed.
.TP
.B \-\-no\-content
Do not preview regular-file contents.
.TP
.BR \-\-content= auto | never
Enable the default preview policy or disable previews.
.TP
.B \-\-raw\-content
Do not escape control data in preview text.
Tree prefixes and line processing still apply.
Entry names and symbolic-link targets remain escaped.
.TP
.B \-\-dirs\-only
Show and enter real directories only.
Symbolic links to directories are not treated as directories.
.TP
.BR \-H ", " \-\-human\-readable
Format sizes with IEC units such as KiB and MiB.
.TP
.BR \-U ", " \-\-unsorted
Use filesystem order instead of locale sorting.
This mode retains only one pending child per open directory level.
.TP
.B \-\-ascii
Draw the tree with ASCII characters.
.TP
.B \-\-unicode
Draw the tree with Unicode box characters.
.TP
.B \-\-summary
Print cumulative type, byte, skip, and error counters after traversal.
.TP
.BR \-\-language= auto | en | ru
Select message and label language.
Option names and values are not translated.
.TP
.B \-\-version
Print version and license information, then exit.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print command-line help, then exit.
.TP
.B \-\-
End option parsing.
Use this before a path beginning with a hyphen.
.SH OPERANDS
Root operands are inspected even if they match an exclusion pattern.
Exclusions apply only to entries discovered while reading directories.
A lone hyphen is an ordinary path operand.
.SH TRAVERSAL
By default, visible names in each directory are collected and sorted with
.BR strcoll (3)
under the active locale.
.B \-\-unsorted
uses the order returned by
.BR readdir (3)
and bounds directory-entry memory.
.PP
The root has depth zero.
A depth limit controls descent; a directory at the limit is still displayed.
The entries
.B .
and
.B ..
are ignored.
.PP
Symbolic links are reported with their targets and are never followed.
Link targets and paths are held in dynamically sized buffers rather than
fixed
.B PATH_MAX
arrays.
.SH FILE PREVIEWS
Only regular files are previewed.
Before reading,
.B kitten
opens the path without following its final symbolic link and verifies with
.BR fstat (2)
that its type, device, and inode match the preceding
.BR lstat (2)
result.
.PP
Files whose current size exceeds the limit are skipped.
A file containing a NUL byte during the scan is labeled binary.
Empty files, open failures, read failures, growth beyond the limit, and
truncated second passes receive explicit labels.
Binary and oversized files are skips rather than errors.
.PP
Previews are line-oriented.
Trailing CR and LF bytes are removed from each displayed line, and
.B kitten
adds its own newline and tree prefix.
.SH OUTPUT SAFETY
Entry names and symbolic-link targets are always escaped.
Control characters, invalid encoded bytes, and terminal escape data therefore
cannot create unmarked tree lines through a crafted name.
.PP
Default preview output preserves tabs and printable characters recognized by
the active locale while escaping control and invalid data.
.B \-\-raw\-content
disables preview escaping and should be used only for trusted files.
.SH SUMMARY
The summary contains counts for displayed directories, regular files,
symbolic links, and special files.
Its byte total is the sum of observed regular-file metadata sizes, including
files whose contents were not displayed.
.PP
The skipped count combines entries filtered by options and previews skipped as
binary, oversized, grown, or truncated.
The error count covers observed metadata, open, read, allocation, and
traversal failures.
Byte totals saturate at
.B UINTMAX_MAX
and are marked on overflow.
.SH LOCALIZATION
In automatic mode, an
.B ru
message locale selects Russian output; other locales use English.
The normal
.BR LC_ALL ,
.BR LC_MESSAGES ,
and
.B LANG
precedence applies.
.PP
Tree drawing is selected separately.
UTF-8 locales use Unicode by default, while other locales use ASCII.
.B \-\-ascii
and
.B \-\-unicode
override the locale, with the last occurrence winning.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Arguments were valid and traversal completed without an observed error.
.TP
.B 1
Arguments were invalid, a requested operation failed, or an output stream
could not be flushed.
.SH EXAMPLES
Inspect the current directory with previews:
.PP
.RS
.nf
kitten
.fi
.RE
.PP
Print only tree structure and metadata:
.PP
.RS
.nf
kitten \-\-no\-content src
.fi
.RE
.PP
Limit depth and preview size:
.PP
.RS
.nf
kitten \-L 2 \-m 64K path/to/project
.fi
.RE
.PP
Exclude repository noise and print totals:
.PP
.RS
.nf
kitten \-\-exclude=.git \-\-exclude='*.o' \-\-summary .
.fi
.RE
.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B LC_ALL
Overrides all locale categories.
.TP
.B LC_MESSAGES
Controls automatic message-language selection when not overridden by
.BR LC_ALL .
.TP
.B LANG
Supplies the locale fallback.
.SH PORTABILITY
.B kitten
targets C99 and POSIX.1-2008.
Native Windows APIs are not supported.
The inspected filesystem is live; race checks detect some replacements but do
not provide a transactional snapshot.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /usr/local/bin/kitten
Default installed executable.
.TP
.I /usr/local/share/man/man1/kitten.1
Default installed manual page.
.TP
.I /usr/local/share/info/kitten.info
Optional Info manual.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2026 kitten contributors.
.PP
Redistribution and use are permitted under the BSD 2-Clause License.
This software is provided without warranty.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR cat (1),
.BR find (1),
.BR tree (1),
.BR fnmatch (3)
