\input texinfo
@setfilename kitten.info
@settitle kitten manual
@documentencoding UTF-8
@documentlanguage en
@set VERSION 0.1.0

@dircategory File utilities
@direntry
* kitten: (kitten).             Inspect trees with inline text previews.
@end direntry

@copying
This manual documents kitten version @value{VERSION}.

Copyright @copyright{} 2026 kitten contributors.

Permission to use, copy, modify, and distribute this manual under the terms of
the BSD 2-Clause License is granted.  The complete license appears in
@ref{License}.
@end copying

@titlepage
@title kitten
@subtitle Source trees with metadata and inline text previews
@subtitle Version @value{VERSION}
@author kitten contributors
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top kitten

kitten prints source trees with file metadata and bounded inline text previews.
This manual describes version @value{VERSION}.
@end ifnottex

@menu
* Introduction::                What kitten is designed to do.
* Invocation::                  Command-line syntax and options.
* Preview behavior::            Text, binary, and size handling.
* Traversal::                   Ordering, depth, links, and exclusions.
* Localization::                Language and tree drawing selection.
* Output safety::               Escaping and changing filesystems.
* Building and installation::   Compiling and staged installation.
* Packaging::                   Guidance for distribution packages.
* Portability::                 Supported interfaces and systems.
* Exit status::                 Success and failure conditions.
* License::                     BSD 2-Clause License.
@end menu

@node Introduction
@chapter Introduction

@command{kitten} fills the gap between a directory-only tree and opening every
file separately.  It prints a sorted hierarchy, identifies each entry, shows
regular-file sizes, and places small text files directly below their tree node.

Typical uses include:

@itemize @bullet
@item reviewing a small source tree without repeatedly opening files;
@item attaching bounded context to a bug report or review note;
@item preparing a readable project snapshot for another tool;
@item identifying empty, binary, oversized, unreadable, or unusual entries;
@item inspecting directory structure without following symbolic links.
@end itemize

The program deliberately has a narrow scope.  It does not modify files, follow
symbolic links, interpret ignore files, provide a transactional filesystem
snapshot, or replace general archiving and search tools.

@node Invocation
@chapter Invocation

The general form is:

@example
kitten [@var{option}]... [@var{path}]...
@end example

With no path, kitten inspects the current directory.  When exactly one operand
names a real directory, kitten changes into it and prints @file{./} as the root.
Multiple operands are printed as separate roots in argument order.

Options may appear before or after path operands.  @option{--} ends option
parsing.  A single @file{-} is always a path; any other path beginning with a
hyphen must follow @option{--}.

@menu
* Preview options::             Selecting and limiting contents.
* Traversal options::           Depth, exclusions, and ordering.
* Display options::             Sizes, branches, language, and totals.
@end menu

@node Preview options
@section Preview options

@table @option
@item -m @var{bytes}
@itemx --max-bytes=@var{bytes}
Set the largest file eligible for an inline preview.  The default is 256K.
The suffixes @samp{K}, @samp{M}, and @samp{G}, in either letter case, multiply
the value by powers of 1024.  A suffix must be the final character.  Zero is
valid and permits only an empty file to reach the preview reader.

The long option accepts both @option{--max-bytes=64K} and
@option{--max-bytes 64K}.

@item --no-content
Disable inline contents while retaining the tree and metadata.

@item --content=@var{when}
Select @samp{auto} to enable normal previews or @samp{never} to disable them.
The value is intentionally stable and is not translated.  The separated form
@option{--content never} is also accepted.  When content-setting options are
repeated, the last one wins.

@item --raw-content
Print file contents without escaping control bytes.  Names and symbolic-link
targets remain escaped.  This mode is intended only for trusted files because
their contents can write terminal control sequences.

@end table

@node Traversal options
@section Traversal options

@table @option
@item -L @var{depth}
@itemx --depth=@var{depth}
Limit descent to a non-negative number of levels.  Depth zero prints only each
root.  Depth one includes immediate children without descending into child
directories.  With no limit, all reachable real directories are traversed.

@item --exclude=@var{pattern}
Skip entries matched by a shell-style pattern.  The test is made against the
entry name, the constructed path, and a path with an initial @file{./} removed.
The option may be repeated.  @code{fnmatch} is called with pathname-aware
matching for paths, so a wildcard does not cross a slash.

Excluded entries increment the skipped counter.  Their children are not read.

@item --dirs-only
Print and descend into real directories only.  Regular files, symbolic links,
and special entries are skipped.

@item -U
@itemx --unsorted
Use the order supplied by the filesystem and retain only one pending entry.
The default collects a directory's names and sorts them according to the active
locale.  Unsorted mode is useful when a directory is too large to collect
comfortably in memory.
@end table

@node Display options
@section Display options

@table @option
@item -H
@itemx --human-readable
Print binary sizes using KiB, MiB, GiB, and TiB.  Values below 1024 remain in
bytes.  Exact byte counts are the default and are preferable for machine
comparisons.

@item --ascii
Force ASCII branches such as @samp{|--} and @samp{`--}.  Without this option,
kitten selects Unicode for a UTF-8 locale and ASCII otherwise.

@item --unicode
Force Unicode branches regardless of the locale.  When @option{--ascii} and
@option{--unicode} are both present, the last one wins.

@item --summary
After all roots, print totals for real directories, regular files, symbolic
links, special files, regular-file bytes, skipped entries, and errors.  A byte
total that cannot be represented saturates and receives an overflow label.

@item --language=@var{language}
Select @samp{auto}, @samp{en}, or @samp{ru}.  Auto mode chooses Russian when the
active message locale begins with @samp{ru} and English otherwise.  This option
translates labels and diagnostics, not option names, values, paths, or contents.

@item --version
Print the canonical program name, version, copyright notice, and license
summary, then exit successfully.

@item -h
@itemx --help
Print a localized command summary, defaults, examples, and exit-status note,
then exit successfully.
@end table

@node Preview behavior
@chapter Preview behavior

A regular file is opened only when previews are enabled.  The open is
non-blocking and refuses a final symbolic link.  kitten then checks the opened
descriptor with @code{fstat}; a pathname replaced by a FIFO, directory, or link
therefore cannot make the preview open wait indefinitely.

The size obtained from the opened descriptor is compared with the configured
limit.  A larger file is labeled and skipped without reading its data.  For an
eligible file, kitten scans the whole file before printing it.  Any NUL byte
marks the file as binary, including a NUL after the first 4096 bytes.  A file
that grows past the limit during this scan is also skipped.

The text pass uses POSIX @code{getline}.  Trailing newline and carriage-return
bytes become tree line boundaries.  Empty files and empty lines receive visible
tree framing.  Read failures set the final exit status.

Files can change between the scan and display passes.  kitten bounds the second
pass independently and reports truncation rather than exceeding the configured
preview limit.

@node Traversal
@chapter Traversal

The entries @file{.} and @file{..} are always ignored.  Sorted mode reads names
from a descriptor-backed directory stream, stores them, and applies locale
collation before filtering and printing.  @option{--unsorted} processes the
same stream incrementally in filesystem order.

Each directory is opened non-blocking with final-symlink following disabled and
converted to a POSIX directory stream.  Symbolic-link targets are read into a
growing buffer, avoiding fixed @code{PATH_MAX} and 4096-byte assumptions.  A
symbolic link is printed but never traversed.

Special entries include FIFOs, sockets, devices, and any type that is neither a
real directory, a regular file, nor a symbolic link.  They are never opened as
previews.

The tree is a live inspection, not a snapshot.  An entry may disappear or
change type between directory enumeration and inspection; observable failures
are printed and cause status 1.

@node Localization
@chapter Localization

At startup kitten calls @code{setlocale} for the process environment.  The C
library applies the usual locale precedence, including @env{LC_ALL},
@env{LC_MESSAGES}, and @env{LANG}.  English is the fallback for every locale
without a built-in Russian translation.

Use an explicit @option{--language=en} or @option{--language=ru} for logs,
scripts, examples, and bug reports that require reproducible wording.  System
error text comes from @code{strerror} and can follow a locale beyond kitten's
two built-in message sets.

The character encoding reported by @code{nl_langinfo(CODESET)} controls the
automatic branch style.  Message language and branch style are independent;
for example, Russian messages can be combined with @option{--ascii}.

@node Output safety
@chapter Output safety

POSIX filenames and symbolic-link targets may contain newlines, tabs, escape
bytes, and other controls.  kitten prints controls and backslashes in those
fields as readable C-style or hexadecimal escapes.  Crafted names therefore
cannot create fake tree nodes or issue common ANSI terminal commands.

Content previews preserve tabs and valid locale-encoded characters while
escaping ASCII controls, multibyte control characters, DEL, and invalid encoded
bytes.  They do not perform character-set conversion or Unicode normalization.
@option{--raw-content} disables content escaping for trusted files.  Filename
and symbolic-link-target escaping remains active in every mode.

No-follow descriptor checks compare the opened device and inode with the
preceding @code{lstat} result.  This closes the most direct pathname replacement
races, including the regular-file-to-FIFO hang and replacement by another
regular file.  It does not make traversal transactional: ancestor path
components and file data can still change while the program runs.

@node Building and installation
@chapter Building and installation

kitten requires a C99 compiler, POSIX.1-2008 headers and library interfaces,
and a POSIX-like @command{make}.  It has no third-party runtime libraries.

Build the executable with:

@example
make
@end example

The equivalent direct command is:

@example
cc -std=c99 -Wall -Wextra -Wpedantic -O2 \
  src/main.c src/walk.c src/output.c -o kitten
@end example

The Makefile accepts the conventional @code{CC}, @code{CPPFLAGS},
@code{CFLAGS}, @code{LDFLAGS}, and @code{LDLIBS} overrides.  For example:

@example
make CC=clang CFLAGS='-O2 -pipe'
@end example

The default prefix is @file{/usr/local}.  Install the executable and man page
with:

@example
make install
@end example

Use @code{PREFIX} for another hierarchy and @code{DESTDIR} for staging:

@example
make PREFIX=/usr DESTDIR=/tmp/kitten-package install
@end example

The Info manual is optional so the ordinary build does not require Texinfo:

@example
make info
make PREFIX=/usr DESTDIR=/tmp/kitten-package install-info
@end example

@command{make clean} removes the executable and rendered Info file.
@command{make uninstall} removes the paths installed by the selected prefix and
destination root.

@node Packaging
@chapter Packaging

Distribution packages should pass their compiler and linker policy flags,
select @code{PREFIX=/usr}, and install into a package root using @code{DESTDIR}.
The install target is non-interactive and creates the required directories.

For an Arch-style package, the build and package phases can use:

@example
build() @{
  make PREFIX=/usr
@}

package() @{
  make PREFIX=/usr DESTDIR="$pkgdir" install
@}
@end example

Use the SPDX identifier @samp{BSD-2-Clause}.  A complete upstream PKGBUILD is
not included until a release archive, stable URL, and checksum exist.

The Texinfo source is supplied for potential GNU evaluation.  GNU normally
recommends GPL version 3 or later for an accepted package; kitten intentionally
remains under BSD-2-Clause unless its copyright holders make a separate future
decision.

@node Portability
@chapter Portability

The supported baseline is C99 and POSIX.1-2008 on GNU/Linux and BSD systems.
The implementation uses directory streams, descriptor status checks, POSIX
pattern matching, locale information, and POSIX line input.  It avoids a fixed
maximum pathname and does not require GNU @code{getopt_long}.

Native Windows directory APIs are outside the supported scope.  A POSIX
environment such as Cygwin is required on Windows.  Other Unix-like systems may
work when they provide the required POSIX.1-2008 interfaces.

@node Exit status
@chapter Exit status

@table @asis
@item 0
Every requested operation completed successfully, or help/version output was
requested.

@item 1
An option was invalid, a requested path could not be inspected, traversal or
reading failed, memory was exhausted, or an output stream reported an error.
@end table

Binary and oversized previews are expected filtering outcomes and do not by
themselves cause failure.  With @option{--summary}, the errors field counts
traversal and read errors observed before the summary is written.  A late
standard-output failure still changes the process status even though it cannot
be reflected retroactively in that summary.

@node License
@appendix BSD 2-Clause License

Copyright (c) 2026, kitten contributors
All rights reserved.

Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without
modification, are permitted provided that the following conditions are met:

@enumerate
@item
Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this
list of conditions and the following disclaimer.

@item
Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this
list of conditions and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or
other materials provided with the distribution.
@end enumerate

THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS "AS IS"
AND ANY EXPRESS OR IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE
DISCLAIMED. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDER OR CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE
FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR
SERVICES; LOSS OF USE, DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER
CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY,
OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF THE USE
OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

@bye
